so i started the recording
i was going blind
so here we go the outer solar system and
um
without further ado we will have a
little roll call of what we find there
so
obviously this is the realm that's
dominated by the giant planets
four of them jupiter saturn uranus and
neptune
but there are lots of moons to consider
as well paul we can't see your
presentation
so i'm sorry have i forgotten i've made
a mess of it
that's because i got out of order isn't
it
thank you clive okay it's all going on
at once here
we'll try that again can you see it now
yes thank you
right so the outer solar system
and we have the roll call of the four
giant planets jupiter saturn uranus and
neptune there
lots of moons and many dwarf planets
uh an ever increasing number of dwarf
planets in fact
and we'll say more about that later on
but that's uh
not the only occupants of the outer
solar system
there's really quite a number of
different things to discover out there
just to give you a sense of the scale
the outer solar system is an absolutely
vast region
compared to last week where we were in
the inner solar system
this orange ring is the orbit of mars
and we pretty much
stopped at mars just mentioned that
beyond mars came the asteroid belt next
the asteroid belt marks the dividing
line between the inner
and outer solar system
and then we have jupiter saturn uranus
and neptune
and shown on here the dwarf planet pluto
and we will be talking about uh pluto
actually
puts paying it quite a lot more
attention than some of the other objects
just to have our whistle stop tour
this is uh planet jupiter i took this
image from
the back garden here in over with my 14
inch
reflector and a webcam
and you can see the great red spot
here can i get people to put themselves
on mute
just to keep the background noise down
thank you
and the lovely cloud belts across north
and south of the equator
you can also see that the planet is
wider across the equator than it is pole
to pole
and that's because it spins very fast
indeed
it's a huge planet you could drop a
thousand earths into it
but not very dense only 300 times the
mass
of the earth so a density of about a
third as much
but it is two and a half times the mass
of all the other planets put together
so it really does rather dominate things
and as i said five astronomical units
that's five earth sun distances
from the sun to jupiter and the orbit
takes 12 years to go round
another image a fantastic shot this one
not one of mine
of the atmosphere of jupiter again with
those cloud belts
showing some more of the structure the
black dot
is the shadow of one of the moons of
jupiter that's passing across in front
of it
um but i just wanted to say briefly
about some of the chemistry
out here in the outer solar system it's
so
cold out that uh this far out away from
the sun
that all of the most volatile gases
are able to be trapped and retained
by the gravity of the planets and so
they grow these
vast gaseous envelopes
88 hydrogen 10 helium in the case of
jupiter with traces of all sorts of
other
interesting chemicals that
some of which are kind of on the way to
the building blocks
of um uh organic chemistry and life
i've got another animation here of the
atmosphere of jupiter
showing that rotation it only takes just
over
10 hours to spin on its axis despite
being such a large
object and what they've done here is
pinned the great red spot
and used that as the reference point and
then made everything else
move relative to it in the sequence of
images
and you can see that some of the cloud
belts seem to be moving
forwards and some backwards so there's
really quite a complicated
uh structure with different bands moving
at different speeds
the great red spot itself was just first
observed by galileo the first time he
looked at jupiter back 400 years ago
with his small telescope it's quite
obvious
and is a large hurricane which has been
raging for at least 400 years now from
time to time
it looked like it was going to fade away
and for a little while it became
the great gray spot the image at the
bottom there was taken by
the pioneer space probe series of stop
motion pictures
again every time the great red spot was
in line
they took an image so you can see that
seems to stay more or less
stationary and the rest of the
atmosphere moves relative to it
but the great red spot viewed with the
telescope does rotate around
in about 11 hours and so
actually if you don't see it then you
just have to wait a few hours four or
five
six hours usually and it will reappear
from behind the planet
and become visible again we've often
wondered what causes the red color
right on the tops of the cloud tops of
this hurricane
and there was a paper published a couple
of years ago that
gives the answer which is it's sunburn
in fact it's the action of ultraviolet
light on the chemicals in the atmosphere
of jupiter
that is causing a chemical reaction
creating
ammonium hydrosulfide which is a
relatively complex sulfur nitrogen and
hydrogen compound
and that is responsible for this red
tinge
we're not entirely sure of the internal
structure of the giant planets
we think that there's probably a small
rocky core
maybe the same size as the earth or
twice or three times the mass of the
earth
in the case of jupiter right deep down
in the center
and then a vast ocean of metallic liquid
hydrogen
overlaying it we've recently managed to
replicate metallic hydrogen under
enormous pressure
in the laboratory on earth in a diamond
anvil and prove that it can exist
and we're often speculated that that's
what is probably
going to be in the very high pressure
and quite high temperature environments
in the cores of some of these giant
planets
and then overlaying that the density
gradually decreases
to the atmosphere that we can see and
study
and indeed we did drop the galileo space
probe down through
the clouds tops of jupiter and got some
data back as it
parachuted down until the pressure and
temperature
crushed the spacecraft so only a
fairly small distance inside the
pressure overwhelmed it
it has a strong magnetic field that
metallic hydrogen
spinning around and being turbulent
creates the dynamo effect
in the same way that the liquid metal in
the core of the earth
gives us our magnetic shields and you do
get
aurora on the planets as well this uh
northern lights on jupiter here very
spectacular
and a different color you're getting
this blue color
because of the different chemistry of
the atmosphere
on earth the green is caused by oxygen
we don't have free oxygen
in the atmosphere of jupiter and it's
mostly the methane
that is giving the blue color
now on the right here we have the
discovery image recording
in galileo's notebook where he found
that jupiter had a small family of moons
orbiting around it they're marked by the
little stars
either side of the circle which is the
planet itself
and here's a telescope picture i took
with a
modest size um six-inch reflector
telescope
of jupiter with its cloud belts picking
up the four
galilean moons as they're known io the
closest
in europa actually is the second closest
and sometimes deceptive ganymede is
orbiting round behind jupiter here
in its orbit so it looks like it's
closer than europa
but it isn't it's just a matter of line
of sight
and then the fourth one is callisto here
if we look at those with images taken by
space probes
you get fantastic detail we've got most
of the
whole disc of the four of them at the
top
and then some zoomed in images
underneath
and amazing colors and structures that
you can see there
so let's have a look at each of them in
turn starting with io
io is the nearest moon and
looks like a pizza in the top left hand
corner there
but all of those colors are not in fact
cheese
but they are sulfur in different forms
depending on how quickly you cool sulfur
down
from its molten state you get either
yellow
orange black or white forms of it
and you can see those are the four
colors that comprise the surface of io
it is almost entirely covered in sulfur
and the black things are volcanoes
volcanic
calderas um spewing lava out onto the
surface
and we've zoomed in on one of the
calderas here and you can even see the
riverlets of lava running across the
surface
this is a backlit image where the sun is
partially behind
the direction of sight and so it's
causing
a plume of material here to be
illuminated
above the surface of io and this is an
active volcano called pele named after a
hawaiian god not the footballer
that's erupting off the surface and
again here we have pele
erupting but this is not the only
eruption that's going on
there's another one there look and if
you look closely there's another one
there there's one there and there's one
there so there are at least
five active volcanoes on the surface of
io
caught in action there in that one shot
it's the most volcanic place we know
moving out we get to europa about the
same size as io they're both about the
same size as the earth's moon
and europa is fairly shiny but covered
with uh these grooves these brown
stained grooves that seem to cut across
what looks like a very icy surface just
one
fairly significant impact crater there
and perhaps another one there but
the rest of it is largely again devoid
of impact craters so it looks
nothing like our moon despite being
relatively similar mass and size
and we think what is going on is that
there is an internal
rocky core overlaid by
a mantle and then a thick ocean
of liquid water salty uh
briny water covered by a very thick
outer coating of ice where the water
would have
been frozen by being exposed to the cold
of space
almost no atmosphere over the outside of
that so nothing to
keep the cold away from the surface
so the ice is probably 10 to 50
kilometers thick
but nevertheless it's got these cracks
and grooves and they seem to be bringing
up
these brown stained chemicals
from beneath and i'm fairly sure that
these are going to turn out to be
organic in origin and it's all pointing
to the fact that there
are probably biological processes
active today in the uh oceans of europa
underneath so we are talking alien life
forms
in this ocean i think i can't prove it
we will have to go there and
sample exactly what is going on on the
surface
and try to penetrate through and maybe
drop a submarine or something
into the oceans of europa
amazing the fact there's actually more
water on europa than there is in the
whole of
earth's oceans by a factor of two
so deep there are they then we get
ganymede ganymede's the largest
moon in the solar system it's actually
larger than the planet mercury
and may also have layers of liquid water
in its interior in the same way
and the interesting question is what is
stopping these moons
being completely frozen they're
fairly small and something is keeping
their
interiors very warm small
planets and small worlds like this
should lose their heat to space
like mars has done and freeze up
their interiors and be
solid rather than having any liquid
water or anything
so they should have lost all of their
heat because they have a
smaller volume compared to their surface
area
as do small children and take a small
child out on a cold day
it will need a coat very quickly whereas
you can
cope for a bit longer
and the reason turns out to be a tug of
war between the three
moons and the giant planet jupiter
illustrated in this little animation at
the bottom here
the inner moon io is whizzing round and
you'll notice
every other time it gets to the top it
meets europa
so there it met europa and the next time
around there was no one home
and then it met europa again if you
watch it
nobody there europa no one there
europa now if you watch europa the
second one
it does the same thing with ganymede
it's going to catch ganymede at the
bottom there
go round get to the bottom nobody home
get to the bottom again the second time
it catches ganymede
and that two to one ratio or four to two
to one ratio
causes their orbits to keep getting uh
the same kick in the same direction and
puts them into elliptical shape orbits
which carry them nearer and further from
the giant planet and that creates a
tidal
stretching and squishing effect
caused by the differential gravity of
jupiter as they approach it and then
move further away
and that pummeling that they get from
that tidal stretching
causes the friction in the interior and
warms them up
and stops them freezing the fourth moon
callisto
takes no part in this tug of war it
orbits a bit further out and is not in
a integer relationship it's not in a two
to one relationship with
ganymede or any other simple
relationship it's kind of doing its own
thing
and the result of that is it has indeed
not got that heat source from the tidal
stretching
and has completely frozen up and inside
and has no volcanic activity recovering
the surface
and that's results in it gradually
accumulating more and more craters
as you can see and in the
exposed surface being darkened by the
effect of the solar wind
the solar wind darkens down exposed rock
over time
and that's why the older regions of our
moon the the mari the very old
crater impact zones are very dark when
you look at them compared to
the fresher craters which look bright
same thing going on
here on callisto now jupiter also has a
set of rings
we didn't really discover them until
quite late i think they were discovered
in backlit images from the voyager
probes
and so they're not really visible from
earth and they're quite close
into the planet they all uh inside the
orbits of um
io and in fact there are a few little
moons
tiny potato shaped captured asteroid
type moons
amalfia and astria metis and phoebe
that are orbiting around in the ring
zone and keeping the structure of the
rings going
there's a little picture of uh amalfia
the largest this is the fifth
largest in fact moon of jupiter and it
orbits inside the ring zone here
then we've got the four large moons and
then exterior to callisto
orbiting around jupiter it's got
i don't know how many i think there were
79 total moons at the last count
orbiting round in this completely
chaotic
uh three-dimensional um
set of orbits and these are probably
or almost certainly captured asteroids
quite a few of them even go around
jupiter the wrong way
in retrograde orbits as we would call it
in
astronomical terms and so almost
certainly
asteroids from the asteroid belt that
wandered too close to jupiter
got caught up in its gravity
also associated with jupiter there are
some
trojan asteroids so here's jupiter
here's the main
asteroid belt between jupiter and mars
but leading and trailing jupiter on its
passage around the the sun it's got
asteroids that it has
herded into these zones 60 degrees ahead
and 60 degrees behind and these are
semi-stable
orbital positions and they will
eventually
probably drift away from these getting
perturbed by
the influence of other giant planets but
um that's a relatively stable position
for them
uh controlled by the gravity of jupiter
and most of the large planets have these
little families of
trojan asteroids
now if we move on out to saturn slightly
smaller than jupiter
you can see the figures there i won't
read them all out it takes
30 years nearly to orbit round and
actually that's uh
in a five to two relationship with
jupiter
so for every five orbits of jupiter
saturn does exactly two and that's what
keeps them
stable and keeps most of the sailor
system in some sort of order
controlled by the uh relative orbits of
the two giants uh
jupiter and saturn but of course it's
most famous for the rings that you see
in this marvelous picture
and a little bit of structure on the
cloud tops
with his rather more muted tones than
jupiter
it also has a magnetic field pointing
again to that same sort of internal
structure
to the planet with uh liquid
metal in a liquid hydrogen in the center
and creates the aurora again with that
same blue color
indicating methane in the atmosphere is
responsible for it
a rather curious thing that was
discovered by the cassini
probe that flew over the pole of saturn
is this giant hexagonal feature in the
atmosphere
this is six small hurricanes orbiting
around
the central uh rotating
zone right at the pole and that's a
relatively stable hydrodynamic
structure and seems to persist for quite
a long time
you've done mathematical simulations of
it it was a little bit of a surprise
to see it though and again there's a
fantastic color picture
of the polar hexagon from cassini
and some fantastic images of the real
detailed structure
in the cloud tops and cassini plunged
into
the clouds and parked itself
interior to saturn for tidiness reasons
they decided to dispose of the
spacecraft by throwing it into the
atmosphere of saturn
so they got some very good close-ups
just before the probe died
but nevertheless um got rid of it and
the reason for that was they didn't want
it to crash into
any of saturn's moons i'll explain why
in a moment
and then as cassini passed behind saturn
it took this fantastic picture here
um the sun in eclipse behind saturn
blotted out
but the rings forward scattering the
stray light showing just how complex
the structure of the rings are and how
there are
these extra thinner rings and bands
around the outside of the main rings
that you don't normally see
and there's a pale blue dot just there
and that is planet earth just being
shown through one of the dusty rings an
amazing shot
the rings are very thin and composed of
all these separate little tiny ringlets
and often there are little moons
orbiting around
inside the ring zone that are keeping
the little dusty and ice chunks that
make up the rings
in order and here's two of them
prometheus and pandora
one orbiting inside this set of rings
towards saturn
and one just outside of it and these are
shepherd moons as they're known
and they keep the ring particles in
order you can see how their gravity is
creating these ripples
and disturbances in the the rings
themselves
and here in this picture on the external
edge of what uh the ring
structure we think there is a new small
moonlet a shepherd moon forming creating
this little blob here
as gravity is gradually accumulating
more material
so a new moon is being born out of some
of the uh
debris around saturn there
saturn's got a family of moons and they
are perhaps
some of the most interesting along with
those of jupiter
in particular this one titan again
about the same size as ganymede about
the same size as the planet mercury
it has an atmosphere that's 50 percent
more dense than our
own and we have a job to see through it
this this picture was taken using
infrared to try to see
through the cloud and we can just about
begin to
maybe make out some surface detail
through the
the hazy cloud filled atmosphere
but the other three pictures this upper
right one
was taken with radar that is able to
penetrate the clouds
and these two are taken from the huygens
probe that was dropped
and parachuted down through the clouds
a couple of mountains with a valley
between them
and you can see what looks like the
branching structure of
rivers in the valley and then the probe
parachuted down and landed about
here in this uh this zone just on the
edge of the mountains
on what what looks like a beach covered
in pebbles or a dried up riverbed
we're not quite sure but the pebbles are
made of ice
as are the mountains water ice and the
rivers that are running across the
surface here
are made not of water but of liquid
methane
the temperature is minus 160 degrees
on titan and so lik liquefied natural
gas
that we would cook with here as a gas
but it's a liquid at these temperatures
is creating these rivers
and this is the kraken mare a large lake
again you can see the rivers the river
channels running into it
and islands within the lake
if we look at some further details of
titan we've seen
rain clouds moving across uh and blowing
around so there's active weather systems
again the rain is not water it is
raining liquid methane
and that rain runs down the rivers into
the
large lake again crack and marie here
and if you look at this inset region
here we've got
four different images taken at different
times moving from year to year
the first one shows that same image and
then it's
changed here but if you look at it you
can still see the same structure is
present
it's just some of the liquid has gone
and been replaced by land
this is the seasonal level changes
in the lake as the methane
evaporates back into the atmosphere
during the summer on titan
and then rains back and the level of the
lake goes back up again
during the winter seasons
again more clouds and other lakes
all over the surface here this was a
very recent image
released by nasa
moving on we have another very
interesting moon enceladus
this picture here shows the surface
covered
in what looks like icy deposits but
they're very much a
surface of two halves this upper region
has got craters on it and therefore has
been
unchanged for a while so that the number
of craters has gradually
increased as small space rocks have
crashed in
to it leaving their impacts but the
region
at the bottom has no impact craters and
so is being resurfaced all the time and
the impact craters are
happening but being rubbed out again by
new material being deposited on top of
them
and these blue grooves here they coined
the term tiger stripes for them
not quite sure since tigers are not blue
and white
but that's what they call them anyway
are cracks
through an icy surface just like europa
leading down to a salty briny ocean
in a protected habitable zone beneath
the uh the ice crust and the cracks are
venting
something into space these two images
the bottom one
in more or less normal color and the top
one enhanced in false color
show a plume of material aligned with
the tiger stripes
emanating into space and the spacecraft
flew
through it and proved that this was in
fact
water but it was water containing
organic material so
carbon oxygen hydrogen compounds and
indeed molecular hydrogen and that is a
very interesting combination because
the the two two together are not really
compatible unless something is
continually
making these uh compounds and it's
highly probable i think that again we
have some sort of life
going on in this protected habitable
zone
um perhaps feeding on the chemistry
of the rock and being able to
use that in combination with the water
and releasing the molecular hydrogen as
a waste product
and building complex organic molecules
in the process
so another world that we need to go and
study in more detail
the number of moons again is up to about
uh or 80 moons around saturn i haven't
got time to cover them all
i'll just show you this one iapetus
which has
um a very curious structure it looks
like someone has cut it in half and then
joined the two halves together badly
there is a ridge running around the
equator and
some frosty deposits on one surface this
we think
is because this edge or this zone of uh
avertus is the leading edge as it
traverses its orbit around saturn and it
picks up material
that's fallen from the rings onto
iapetus
and so you see the frosty icy deposits
and we think the ridge
maybe a collapsed ring system
so maybe e apatus once had its own set
of rings
and the material has fallen out along
its equator and created this ridge
but there are other explanations we
don't really know
if we continue on out we get to the
third of our giant planets uranus rather
smaller
these uh to the uranus and neptune
go by the name ice giants rather than
gas giants
because they contain a lot more of the
icy compounds like
water frozen up and methane and ammonia
and that gives them this characteristic
sort of bluey green
tinges so
just four times the size of the earth
and 14 times the mass
and orbits in 84 years this was a
voyager 2
image taken and really doesn't show any
features at all
rather boring in fact so we'll move on
it was of course discovered by the
famous astronomer william herschel from
his back garden in bath
and when he first spotted it he thought
he'd found a comet
but on tracking the orbits and uh
getting
follow-up observations he realized he
was the first
uh person in modern times to discover a
new planet
we've got a little tiny image of it
there taken through my telescope just a
pale green disc
in false colour and again from voyager
you can
discover that it's tilted over on its
side
um and has its own set of rings around
it plus some active
uh storm systems that are just about
made visible by the false color
now this tilt over on its side is very
peculiar it sometimes means it rolls
along its orbit with the pole
pointing either the north or the south
pole pointing straight at the sun
and other times the orientation is at
right angles to that
so the seasons on europeanus must be
very peculiar indeed
but after its discovery tracking and
working out its orbit
started causing problems people were
unable to predict where it was going to
be
more than a couple of years ahead kept
wandering off course
and this was very curious
and two astronomers took up the
challenge of trying to figure out what
was going on
john q adams here in cambridge and in
paris
urbane la verrier and they both had the
same idea
independently that maybe there was an as
yet
undiscovered planet using its gravity
to pull uranus off course
and they then attempted mathematically
to back calculate by hand no
calculators or computers in those days
to help them
where this planet might be and both made
sets of predictions
adams as you can see made a number of
calculations and produced
a number of different positions um over
a period
1845 and 1846 and they were
not spread out over a vast region sort
of vaguely concentrated around here
le verrier made his one prediction in
just here and the planet was found just
here
and that planet was neptune
about the same size little tiny bit
smaller than
uranus but slightly more massive 17
times the earth's mass
and orbits around the sun once every 165
years
so in fact since its discovery it or
completed the first
orbit just a couple of years ago
great dark spot here very similar to the
great red spot
on jupiter a large storm system that
seems to
be persistent and sticking around for
very long time
and some high clouds it spins quite fast
and the winds speed on neptune is over a
thousand kilometers per hour
so it has some of the fastest winds in
the solar system
the real star of the show at the neptune
system
and the unexpected discovery was its
large moon triton we
we knew about that it was discovered
only a couple of weeks after neptune was
found
but the close-up image from voyager 2
here
shows amazing terrain and an active
surface again no impact craters visible
therefore this surface is young and
dynamic
and constantly being refreshed to rub
out the craters
up at the top here we have this sort of
melon
fruit surface the cantaloupe terrain
with
amazing grooves and then lower down here
we've got what looks like
pink snow on the surface and that is
frozen
nitrogen this sort of temperatures out
in the
deep freeze of the solar system here
we're at minus
230 degrees centigrade
and nitrogen the gas around us that
we're breathing
in the air around us right now freezes
out onto the surface
as this pink snow in these conditions
but there are all these black marks and
these black marks
if you look at them they're elongated
and they're all pointing the same way
this way and this is because they are
the dark dusty material being deposited
downwind in the thin atmosphere
made of nitrogen that uh covers
around the uh the globe on triton
and blows in this direction the
prevailing wind is round this way
and what's happening is that we have
geysers of liquid nitrogen
so the frozen nitrogen is being melted
by some
source of heat and bursting forth and
then vaporizing into a geezer
and carrying dark dusty black material
downwind and depositing it on the
surface
and that black material is very
intriguing because again this is
suggestive
of some interesting chemistry
who knows maybe the pockets of liquid
nitrogen
are home again to some form of
biochemistry going on
out in the deep freeze three billion
miles
from the sun out in the outer reaches of
the solar system
where nobody would have expected it
and so from here on beyond neptune of
course we have pluto
and i'm just going to switch over to a
slide set all about pluto now so i'll
just hold this one here
and quickly
go and find the correct